Next day Frodo woke early, feeling refreshed and well. He
walked along the terraces above the loud-flowing Bruinen
and watched the pale, cool sun rise above the far mountains,
and shine down, slanting through the thin silver mist; the
dew upon the yellow leaves was glimmering, and the woven
nets of gossamer twinkled on every bush. Sam walked beside
him, saying nothing, but sniffing the air, and looking every
now and again with wonder in his eyes at the great heights
in the East. The snow was white upon their peaks.
On a seat cut in the stone beside a turn in the path they
came upon Gandalf and Bilbo deep in talk. ‘Hullo! Good
morning!’ said Bilbo. ‘Feel ready for the great council?’
‘I feel ready for anything,’ answered Frodo. ‘But most of
all I should like to go walking today and explore the valley. I
should like to get into those pine-woods up there.’ He pointed
away far up the side of Rivendell to the north.
‘You may have a chance later,’ said Gandalf. ‘But we cannot
make any plans yet. There is much to hear and decide today.’
Suddenly as they were talking a single clear bell rang out.
‘That is the warning bell for the Council of Elrond,’ cried
Gandalf. ‘Come along now! Both you and Bilbo are wanted.’
Frodo and Bilbo followed the wizard quickly along the
winding path back to the house; behind them, uninvited and
for the moment forgotten, trotted Sam.
Gandalf led them to the porch where Frodo had found his
friends the evening before. The light of the clear autumn
morning was now glowing in the valley. The noise of bubbling waters came up from the foaming river-bed. Birds were
singing, and a wholesome peace lay on the land. To Frodo
312 the fellowship of the ring
his dangerous flight, and the rumours of the darkness growing
in the world outside, already seemed only the memories of a
troubled dream; but the faces that were turned to meet them
as they entered were grave.
Elrond was there, and several others were seated in silence
about him. Frodo saw Glorfindel and Glo´in; and in a corner
alone Strider was sitting, clad in his old travel-worn clothes
again. Elrond drew Frodo to a seat by his side, and presented
him to the company, saying:
‘Here, my friends, is the hobbit, Frodo son of Drogo. Few
have ever come hither through greater peril or on an errand
more urgent.’
He then pointed out and named those whom Frodo had
not met before. There was a younger dwarf at Glo´in’s side:
his son Gimli. Beside Glorfindel there were several other
counsellors of Elrond’s household, of whom Erestor was the
chief; and with him was Galdor, an Elf from the Grey Havens
who had come on an errand from Cı´rdan the Shipwright.
There was also a strange Elf clad in green and brown,
Legolas, a messenger from his father, Thranduil, the King of
the Elves of Northern Mirkwood. And seated a little apart
was a tall man with a fair and noble face, dark-haired and
grey-eyed, proud and stern of glance.
He was cloaked and booted as if for a journey on horseback; and indeed though his garments were rich, and his
cloak was lined with fur, they were stained with long travel.
He had a collar of silver in which a single white stone was
set; his locks were shorn about his shoulders. On a baldric he
wore a great horn tipped with silver that now was laid upon
his knees. He gazed at Frodo and Bilbo with sudden wonder.
‘Here,’ said Elrond, turning to Gandalf, ‘is Boromir, a man
from the South. He arrived in the grey morning, and seeks
for counsel. I have bidden him to be present, for here his
questions will be answered.’
Not all that was spoken and debated in the Council need
now be told. Much was said of events in the world outside,
the council of elrond 313
especially in the South, and in the wide lands east of the
Mountains. Of these things Frodo had already heard many
rumours; but the tale of Glo´in was new to him, and when the
dwarf spoke he listened attentively. It appeared that amid the
splendour of their works of hand the hearts of the Dwarves
of the Lonely Mountain were troubled.
‘It is now many years ago,’ said Glo´in, ‘that a shadow of
disquiet fell upon our people. Whence it came we did not at
first perceive. Words began to be whispered in secret: it was
said that we were hemmed in a narrow place, and that greater
wealth and splendour would be found in a wider world. Some
spoke of Moria: the mighty works of our fathers that are
called in our own tongue Khazad-duˆm; and they declared
that now at last we had the power and numbers to return.’
Glo´in sighed. ‘Moria! Moria! Wonder of the Northern
world! Too deep we delved there, and woke the nameless
fear. Long have its vast mansions lain empty since the children of Durin fled. But now we spoke of it again with longing,
and yet with dread; for no dwarf has dared to pass the doors
of Khazad-duˆm for many lives of kings, save Thro´r only, and
he perished. At last, however, Balin listened to the whispers,
and resolved to go; and though Da´in did not give leave willingly, he took with him Ori and O´ in and many of our folk,
and they went away south.
‘That was nigh on thirty years ago. For a while we had
news and it seemed good: messages reported that Moria had
been entered and a great work begun there. Then there was
silence, and no word has ever come from Moria since.
‘Then about a year ago a messenger came to Da´in, but not
from Moria – from Mordor: a horseman in the night, who
called Da´in to his gate. The Lord Sauron the Great, so he
said, wished for our friendship. Rings he would give for it,
such as he gave of old. And he asked urgently concerning
hobbits, of what kind they were, and where they dwelt. ‘‘For
Sauron knows,’’ said he, ‘‘that one of these was known to
you on a time.’’